If you’re not well-versed in the basics of the stock market, the stock
trading information spewing from CNBC or the markets section of your
favorite newspaper can border on gibberish.

Phrases like “earnings movers” and “intraday highs” don’t mean much to
the average investor, and in many cases, they shouldn’t. If you’re in
it for the long term — with, say, a portfolio of mutual funds geared
toward retirement — you don’t need to worry about what these words mean,
or about the flashes of red or green that cross the bottom of your TV
screen. You can get by just fine without understanding the stock market
much at all. 

If, on the other hand, you want to learn how to trade stocks, you do need
to understand the stock market, and at least some basic information about
how stock trading works. Okey

Stock market basics
The stock market is made up of exchanges, like the New York Stock Exchange
and the Nasdaq. Stocks are listed on a specific exchange, which brings
buyers and sellers together and acts as a market for the shares of those
stocks. The exchange tracks the supply and demand — and directly related,
the price — of each stock.

Need to back up a bit? Read our explainer about stocks.

But this isn’t your typical market, and you can’t show up and pick your
shares off a shelf the way you select produce at the grocery store.
Individual traders are typically represented by brokers — these days,
that’s often an online broker. You place your stock trades through the
broker, which then deals with the exchange on your behalf. (Need a broker?
See our analysis of the best stockbrokers for beginners.)

The NYSE and the Nasdaq are open from 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. Eastern,
with premarket and after-hours trading sessions also available,
depending on your broker.

» Learn more: How to invest in stocks

Understanding the stock market
When people refer to the stock market being up or down, they’re
generally referring to one of the major market indexes.

A market index tracks the performance of a group of stocks, which
either represents the market as a whole or a specific sector of the
market, like technology or retail companies. You’re likely to hear
most about the S&P 500, the Nasdaq composite and the Dow Jones
Industrial Average; they are often used as proxies for the performance
of the overall market.

Investors use indexes to benchmark the performance of their own
portfolios and, in some cases, to inform their stock trading decisions.
You can also invest in an entire index through index funds and
exchange-traded funds, or ETFs, which track a specific index or
sector of the market. Read more about ETFs here.

» Learn more: How the market works

Stock trading information
Most investors would be well-advised to build a diversified portfolio
of stocks or stock index funds and hold on to it through good times and
bad. But investors who like a little more action engage in stock trading.
Stock trading involves buying and selling stocks frequently in an attempt
to time the market.

The goal of stock traders is to capitalize on short-term market events
to sell stocks for a profit, or buy stocks at a low. Some stock traders
are day traders, which means they buy and sell several times throughout
the day. Others are simply active traders, placing a dozen or more trades
per month. (Interested in individual stocks? View our list of
the best-performing stocks this year.)

Investors who trade stocks do extensive research, often devoting hours
a day to following the market. They rely on technical stock analysis,
using tools to chart a stock's movements in an attempt to find
trading opportunities and trends. Many online brokers offer stock
trading information, including analyst reports, stock research and
charting tools. (Learn the basics of how to read stock charts.)

» Our guide to stock trading

Bull markets vs. bear markets
Neither is an animal you’d want to run into on a hike, but the market has
picked the bear as the true symbol of fear: A bear market means stock
prices are falling — thresholds vary, but generally to the tune of 20%
or more — across several of the indexes referenced earlier.

Bull markets are followed by bear markets, and vice versa, with both
often signaling the start of larger economic patterns. In other words,
a bull market typically means investors are confident, which indicates
economic growth. A bear market shows investors are pulling back,
indicating the economy may do so as well.

The good news is that the average bull market far outlasts the average
bear market, which is why over the long term you can grow your money
by investing in stocks.

The S&P 500, which holds around 500 of the largest stocks in the U.S.,
has historically returned an average of around 7% annually, when you
factor in reinvested dividends and adjust for inflation. That means
if you invested $1,000 30 years ago, you could have around $7,600
today. (Explore this further with NerdWallet's investment calculator.)

Stock market crash vs. correction
A stock market correction happens when the stock market drops by 10% or more. A stock market crash is a sudden, very sharp drop in stock prices, like in October 1987 when stocks plunged 23% in a single day.

While crashes can herald a bear market, remember what we mentioned above:
Most bull markets last longer than bear markets — which means stock markets
tend to rise in value over time.

If you're worried about a crash, it helps to focus on the long term. When
the stock market declines, it can be difficult to watch your portfolio’s
value shrink in real time and do nothing about it. However, if you’re
investing for the long term, doing nothing is often the best course.

Thirty-two percent of Americans who were invested in the stock market
during at least one of the last five financial downturns pulled some or
all of their money out of the market. That’s according to
a NerdWallet-commissioned survey, which was conducted online
by The Harris Poll of more than 2,000 U.S. adults, among whom
over 700 were invested in the stock market during at least one of the
past five financial downturns, in June 2018. The survey also found that
28% of Americans would not keep their money in the stock market if there
were a crash today.

It’s likely some of these Americans might rethink pulling their money
if they knew how quickly a portfolio can rebound from the bottom: The
market took just 13 months to recover its losses after the most recent
major sell-off in 2015. Even the Great Recession — a devastating downturn
of historic proportions — posted a complete market recovery in just over
five years. The S&P 500 then posted a compound annual growth rate of 16%
from 2013 to 2017 (including dividends).

If you’re wondering why you should wait years for your portfolio to get
back to zero, remember what happens when you sell investments in a
downturn: You lock in your losses. If you plan to re-enter the market
at a sunnier time, you’ll almost certainly pay more for the privilege
and sacrifice part (if not all) of the gains from the rebound.

Curious how long it would have taken to recover your losses after some
of the stock market’s major downturns? Use our calculator to find out.
